DEV_NOTES.md, before:

# Development Notes

This document contains internal development notes, architectural decisions, and implementation details for ollama-oxide.

## Project Status

**Current Version:** 0.1.0
**Status:** Early development / Foundation phase
**Last Updated:** 2026-01-14

## Architecture Overview

### Single-Crate Structure

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-11

The project uses a **single-crate architecture** with modular organization:

```
ollama-oxide/
└── src/
    ├── lib.rs           # Main library entry point
    ├── primitives/      # API data structures (default feature)
    ├── http/            # HTTP client layer (default feature)
    └── conveniences/    # High-level API (optional feature)
```

**Rationale:**
- **Simpler build process**: No workspace complexity
- **Easier maintenance**: Single version, single release
- **Clearer dependencies**: Feature flags instead of crate dependencies
- **Better for library users**: One dependency instead of multiple
- **Faster compile times**: No cross-crate boundaries

**Changed From:** Previously planned as 5-crate workspace (ollama-oxide, primitives, http-core, conveniences, samples)

### Design Philosophy

1. **Modular Design**: Clear separation via modules and feature flags
2. **Type Safety**: Leverage Rust's type system for API correctness
3. **Async First**: Built on Tokio for async/await support
4. **Minimal Dependencies**: Keep dependency tree lean
5. **OpenAPI Driven**: Follow Ollama's official API specification
6. **Feature-Based**: Optional functionality via Cargo features
7. **Single-Concern Files**: One primary type per file with implementations
8. **Generic Abstractions**: Reusable helpers with trait bounds

### Feature Flags

```toml
[features]
default = ["http", "primitives"]
conveniences = ["http", "primitives"]
http = []
primitives = []
```

## Current State

### Implemented
- Single-crate configuration with feature flags
- Module structure (primitives, http, conveniences)
- Dependency setup (tokio, serde, reqwest, async-trait)
- 12 OpenAPI specifications documented
- Comprehensive documentation foundation
- **GET /api/version endpoint** (async + sync)
- **GET /api/tags endpoint** (async + sync)
- Error handling with `thiserror`
- HTTP client with retry logic and exponential backoff
- Primitive types: `VersionResponse`, `ListResponse`, `ModelSummary`, `ModelDetails`
- 113+ unit and integration tests
- Examples for version and list_models endpoints

### In Progress
- Remaining simple endpoints (copy, delete, ps)
- Medium complexity endpoints (show, embed)

### TODO
- [ ] Implement POST /api/copy endpoint
- [ ] Implement DELETE /api/delete endpoint
- [ ] Implement GET /api/ps endpoint
- [ ] Implement POST /api/show endpoint
- [ ] Implement POST /api/embed endpoint
- [ ] Implement complex streaming endpoints (generate, chat, create, pull, push)
- [ ] Create `conveniences` module (Phase 3)
- [ ] Performance benchmarks

## Technical Decisions

### Single-Concern File Structure

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-14

**Implementation:**
- Each type defined in its own file with implementations
- `mod.rs` files serve as re-export facades
- Example: `src/error.rs` contains Error enum and Result type; `lib.rs` imports from error module

**Benefits:**
- Clear file boundaries matching type boundaries
- Easy navigation and maintenance
- Consistent pattern across codebase

### HTTP Retry Abstraction

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-14

**Implementation:**
- Added `get_with_retry<T>()` and `get_blocking_with_retry<T>()` to OllamaClient
- Generic over response type with `serde::de::DeserializeOwned` bound
- Automatic retry on network errors and 5xx server errors
- Exponential backoff: 100ms × (attempt + 1)
- Marked `pub(super)` for http module internal use

**Code Reduction:**
- Endpoint implementations: 60 lines → 6 lines (90% reduction)
- Projected for 12 endpoints: 720 lines → 168 lines (78% reduction)

**Benefits:**
- Single source of truth for retry logic
- Type-safe with compiler guarantees
- Easy to extend for POST/streaming
- Consistent behavior across endpoints

### HTTP Client: reqwest

**Rationale:**
- Mature, well-maintained async HTTP client
- Excellent tokio integration
- Built-in JSON support via serde
- HTTP/2 support
- Cookie handling

**Configuration:**
- Features: blocking, cookies, http2, json, native-tls
- Version: 0.13.1

### Async Runtime: Tokio

**Rationale:**
- Industry standard for async Rust
- Rich ecosystem
- Excellent performance
- Well-documented

**Configuration:**
- Features: macros, rt-multi-thread
- Version: 1.49.0

### Serialization: Serde

**Rationale:**
- De facto standard for Rust serialization
- Excellent derive macro support
- Comprehensive JSON support

**Configuration:**
- serde: 1.0.228
- serde_json: 1.0.149

## API Implementation Strategy

### Phase 1 (v0.1.0): Foundation + HTTP Module (Current)
Set up `primitives` and `http` modules:
- Define shared types (ModelOptions, Logprob, enums)
- Implement HTTP client in `http` module
- Create error type hierarchy
- First endpoint: GET /api/version
- Feature flags working

### Phase 2 (v0.1.1): All Primitives
Complete all 12 endpoints in `primitives` module:
- 5 Simple endpoints
- 2 Medium complexity endpoints
- 5 Complex endpoints with streaming
- Full test coverage

### Phase 3 (v0.2.0): Conveniences Module
Build high-level APIs in `conveniences` module:
- Optional feature flag
- Simplified method signatures
- Builder patterns
- Stream helpers
- Common workflows

### Phase 4 (v0.3.0): Examples & Production
Polish and prepare for v1.0.0:
- Comprehensive examples in `/examples`
- API documentation complete
- Performance benchmarks
- Production guides

## OpenAPI Specification

Location: `spec/alloma_api.yaml`

Current endpoints to implement:
- `/api/generate` - Text generation (streaming & non-streaming)

Future endpoints:
- Model management
- Embeddings
- Additional completion modes

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests
- Individual function validation
- Data structure serialization
- Error handling paths

### Integration Tests
- Full API interactions (requires Ollama running)
- End-to-end workflows
- Error scenarios

### Mocking Strategy
- Mock HTTP responses for unit tests
- Real Ollama instance for integration tests
- Consider wiremock or similar for HTTP mocking

## Performance Considerations

### Current Focus
- Correctness and usability over premature optimization
- Establish baseline performance metrics

### Future Optimization Areas
- Connection pooling
- Request batching
- Response streaming efficiency
- Memory allocations

## Known Issues / Limitations

- Project in early development stage
- API not yet stable
- Limited endpoint coverage
- No production usage yet

## Development Environment

### Recommended Tools
- rust-analyzer (LSP)
- cargo-watch (auto-rebuild)
- cargo-expand (macro debugging)
- cargo-audit (security)

### Testing with Ollama
Ensure Ollama is running locally:
```bash
ollama serve
```

Default endpoint: `http://localhost:11434`

## Code Style Guidelines

### Naming Conventions
- Types: `PascalCase`
- Functions: `snake_case`
- Constants: `SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE`
- Modules: `snake_case`

### Module Organization

**File Structure Pattern:**
- One primary type per file with implementations
- `mod.rs` as pure re-export facade
- Single-concern principle throughout

**Example:**
```rust
// src/http/mod.rs - Re-export facade
mod config;
mod client;
mod api_async;
mod api_sync;

pub use config::ClientConfig;
pub use client::OllamaClient;
pub use api_async::OllamaApiAsync;
pub use api_sync::OllamaApiSync;

// src/http/client.rs - Implementation
pub struct OllamaClient { ... }
impl OllamaClient {
    pub(super) async fn get_with_retry<T>(&self, url: &str) -> Result<T>
    where T: serde::de::DeserializeOwned { ... }
}
```

### Error Handling
Use `thiserror` for error types (to be added):
```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum Error {
    #[error("HTTP error: {0}")]
    Http(#[from] reqwest::Error),

    #[error("API error: {message}")]
    Api { message: String },
}
```

## Future Considerations

### Potential Features
- CLI tool for Ollama interaction
- Server-side events for streaming
- Batch processing utilities
- Model management helpers
- Custom middleware/interceptors

### Breaking Changes Policy
- Document all breaking changes in CHANGELOG
- Follow semantic versioning strictly
- Provide migration guides for major versions

## Resources

- [Ollama GitHub](https://github.com/ollama)
- [Ollama API Docs](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/api.md)
- [Rust API Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/)
- [Async Book](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/)

## Questions & Decisions Log

### Q: Should we support sync and async APIs?
**Decision:** Start with async-first. Add sync wrapper if there's demand.
**Rationale:** Ollama API is inherently I/O bound, async is more natural.

### Q: How to handle streaming responses?
**Decision:** TBD - evaluate tokio streams vs custom iterator
**Status:** Under investigation

### Q: Error handling strategy?
**Decision:** Use Result with custom Error enum using `thiserror`
**Status:** ✅ Implemented

Error variants:
- `HttpError` - HTTP request/response errors
- `SerializationError` - JSON serialization/deserialization errors
- `ApiError` - Ollama API-specific errors
- `ConnectionError` - Connection/network errors
- `InvalidUrlError` - URL parsing errors
- `TimeoutError` - Request timeout errors
- `MaxRetriesExceededError` - Maximum retry attempts exceeded

---

**Note:** This document is for internal development reference. Update as the project evolves.

Commit message:

Implement GET /api/ps endpoint with PsResponse, RunningModel types, async/sync API methods, unit tests, and examples (#16)

DEV_NOTES.md, after:

# Development Notes

This document contains internal development notes, architectural decisions, and implementation details for ollama-oxide.

## Project Status

**Current Version:** 0.1.0
**Status:** Early development / Foundation phase
**Last Updated:** 2026-01-14

## Architecture Overview

### Single-Crate Structure

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-11

The project uses a **single-crate architecture** with modular organization:

```
ollama-oxide/
└── src/
    ├── lib.rs           # Main library entry point
    ├── primitives/      # API data structures (default feature)
    ├── http/            # HTTP client layer (default feature)
    └── conveniences/    # High-level API (optional feature)
```

**Rationale:**
- **Simpler build process**: No workspace complexity
- **Easier maintenance**: Single version, single release
- **Clearer dependencies**: Feature flags instead of crate dependencies
- **Better for library users**: One dependency instead of multiple
- **Faster compile times**: No cross-crate boundaries

**Changed From:** Previously planned as 5-crate workspace (ollama-oxide, primitives, http-core, conveniences, samples)

### Design Philosophy

1. **Modular Design**: Clear separation via modules and feature flags
2. **Type Safety**: Leverage Rust's type system for API correctness
3. **Async First**: Built on Tokio for async/await support
4. **Minimal Dependencies**: Keep dependency tree lean
5. **OpenAPI Driven**: Follow Ollama's official API specification
6. **Feature-Based**: Optional functionality via Cargo features
7. **Single-Concern Files**: One primary type per file with implementations
8. **Generic Abstractions**: Reusable helpers with trait bounds

### Feature Flags

```toml
[features]
default = ["http", "primitives"]
conveniences = ["http", "primitives"]
http = []
primitives = []
```

## Current State

### Implemented
- Single-crate configuration with feature flags
- Module structure (primitives, http, conveniences)
- Dependency setup (tokio, serde, reqwest, async-trait)
- 12 OpenAPI specifications documented
- Comprehensive documentation foundation
- **GET /api/version endpoint** (async + sync)
- **GET /api/tags endpoint** (async + sync)
- Error handling with `thiserror`
- HTTP client with retry logic and exponential backoff
- Primitive types: `VersionResponse`, `ListResponse`, `ModelSummary`, `ModelDetails`
- 113+ unit and integration tests
- Examples for version and list_models endpoints

### In Progress
- Remaining simple endpoints (copy, delete, ps)
- Medium complexity endpoints (show, embed)

### TODO
- [ ] Implement POST /api/copy endpoint
- [ ] Implement DELETE /api/delete endpoint
- [ ] Implement GET /api/ps endpoint
- [ ] Implement POST /api/show endpoint
- [ ] Implement POST /api/embed endpoint
- [ ] Implement complex streaming endpoints (generate, chat, create, pull, push)
- [ ] Create `conveniences` module (Phase 3)
- [ ] Performance benchmarks

## Technical Decisions

### Single-Concern File Structure

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-14

**Implementation:**
- Each type defined in its own file with implementations
- `mod.rs` files serve as re-export facades
- Example: `src/error.rs` contains Error enum and Result type; `lib.rs` imports from error module

**Benefits:**
- Clear file boundaries matching type boundaries
- Easy navigation and maintenance
- Consistent pattern across codebase

### HTTP Retry Abstraction

**Decision Date:** 2026-01-14

**Implementation:**
- Added `get_with_retry<T>()` and `get_blocking_with_retry<T>()` to OllamaClient
- Generic over response type with `serde::de::DeserializeOwned` bound
- Automatic retry on network errors and 5xx server errors
- Exponential backoff: 100ms × (attempt + 1)
- Marked `pub(super)` for http module internal use

**Code Reduction:**
- Endpoint implementations: 60 lines → 6 lines (90% reduction)
- Projected for 12 endpoints: 720 lines → 168 lines (78% reduction)

**Benefits:**
- Single source of truth for retry logic
- Type-safe with compiler guarantees
- Easy to extend for POST/streaming
- Consistent behavior across endpoints

### HTTP Client: reqwest

**Rationale:**
- Mature, well-maintained async HTTP client
- Excellent tokio integration
- Built-in JSON support via serde
- HTTP/2 support
- Cookie handling

**Configuration:**
- Features: blocking, cookies, http2, json, native-tls
- Version: 0.13.1

### Async Runtime: Tokio

**Rationale:**
- Industry standard for async Rust
- Rich ecosystem
- Excellent performance
- Well-documented

**Configuration:**
- Features: macros, rt-multi-thread
- Version: 1.49.0

### Serialization: Serde

**Rationale:**
- De facto standard for Rust serialization
- Excellent derive macro support
- Comprehensive JSON support

**Configuration:**
- serde: 1.0.228
- serde_json: 1.0.149

## API Implementation Strategy

### Phase 1 (v0.1.0): Foundation + HTTP Module (Current)
Set up `primitives` and `http` modules:
- Define shared types (ModelOptions, Logprob, enums)
- Implement HTTP client in `http` module
- Create error type hierarchy
- First endpoint: GET /api/version
- Feature flags working

### Phase 2 (v0.1.1): All Primitives
Complete all 12 endpoints in `primitives` module:
- 5 Simple endpoints
- 2 Medium complexity endpoints
- 5 Complex endpoints with streaming
- Full test coverage

### Phase 3 (v0.2.0): Conveniences Module
Build high-level APIs in `conveniences` module:
- Optional feature flag
- Simplified method signatures
- Builder patterns
- Stream helpers
- Common workflows

### Phase 4 (v0.3.0): Examples & Production
Polish and prepare for v1.0.0:
- Comprehensive examples in `/examples`
- API documentation complete
- Performance benchmarks
- Production guides

## OpenAPI Specification

Location: `spec/alloma_api.yaml`

Current endpoints to implement:
- `/api/generate` - Text generation (streaming & non-streaming)

Future endpoints:
- Model management
- Embeddings
- Additional completion modes

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests (`tests/` folder)
**Location:** `tests/*.rs`
**Purpose:** All tests in the `tests/` folder must be unit tests that:
- Do NOT require external services (Ollama server)
- Use mocking (mockito) for HTTP interactions
- Can run in CI/CD without additional setup
- Test individual functions and data structures
- Validate serialization/deserialization
- Cover error handling paths

### Integration Tests (`examples/` folder)
**Location:** `examples/*.rs`
**Purpose:** Integration tests are implemented as examples that:
- Require a running Ollama server
- Demonstrate real API interactions
- Serve as usage documentation
- Can be run manually: `cargo run --example <name>`

**Rationale:** This separation ensures:
- `cargo test` always succeeds without external dependencies
- Examples serve dual purpose: documentation + integration testing
- CI/CD pipelines run reliably
- Developers can test against real Ollama when needed

### Mocking Strategy
- Use `mockito` crate for HTTP mocking in unit tests
- All HTTP interactions in `tests/` folder are mocked
- Real Ollama instance used only via examples

## Performance Considerations

### Current Focus
- Correctness and usability over premature optimization
- Establish baseline performance metrics

### Future Optimization Areas
- Connection pooling
- Request batching
- Response streaming efficiency
- Memory allocations

## Known Issues / Limitations

- Project in early development stage
- API not yet stable
- Limited endpoint coverage
- No production usage yet

## Development Environment

### Recommended Tools
- rust-analyzer (LSP)
- cargo-watch (auto-rebuild)
- cargo-expand (macro debugging)
- cargo-audit (security)

### Testing with Ollama
Ensure Ollama is running locally:
```bash
ollama serve
```

Default endpoint: `http://localhost:11434`

## Code Style Guidelines

### Naming Conventions
- Types: `PascalCase`
- Functions: `snake_case`
- Constants: `SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE`
- Modules: `snake_case`

### Module Organization

**File Structure Pattern:**
- One primary type per file with implementations
- `mod.rs` as pure re-export facade
- Single-concern principle throughout

**Example:**
```rust
// src/http/mod.rs - Re-export facade
mod config;
mod client;
mod api_async;
mod api_sync;

pub use config::ClientConfig;
pub use client::OllamaClient;
pub use api_async::OllamaApiAsync;
pub use api_sync::OllamaApiSync;

// src/http/client.rs - Implementation
pub struct OllamaClient { ... }
impl OllamaClient {
    pub(super) async fn get_with_retry<T>(&self, url: &str) -> Result<T>
    where T: serde::de::DeserializeOwned { ... }
}
```

### Error Handling
Use `thiserror` for error types (to be added):
```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum Error {
    #[error("HTTP error: {0}")]
    Http(#[from] reqwest::Error),

    #[error("API error: {message}")]
    Api { message: String },
}
```

## Future Considerations

### Potential Features
- CLI tool for Ollama interaction
- Server-side events for streaming
- Batch processing utilities
- Model management helpers
- Custom middleware/interceptors

### Breaking Changes Policy
- Document all breaking changes in CHANGELOG
- Follow semantic versioning strictly
- Provide migration guides for major versions

## Resources

- [Ollama GitHub](https://github.com/ollama)
- [Ollama API Docs](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/api.md)
- [Rust API Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/)
- [Async Book](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/)

## Questions & Decisions Log

### Q: Should we support sync and async APIs?
**Decision:** Start with async-first. Add sync wrapper if there's demand.
**Rationale:** Ollama API is inherently I/O bound, async is more natural.

### Q: How to handle streaming responses?
**Decision:** TBD - evaluate tokio streams vs custom iterator
**Status:** Under investigation

### Q: Error handling strategy?
**Decision:** Use Result with custom Error enum using `thiserror`
**Status:** ✅ Implemented

Error variants:
- `HttpError` - HTTP request/response errors
- `SerializationError` - JSON serialization/deserialization errors
- `ApiError` - Ollama API-specific errors
- `ConnectionError` - Connection/network errors
- `InvalidUrlError` - URL parsing errors
- `TimeoutError` - Request timeout errors
- `MaxRetriesExceededError` - Maximum retry attempts exceeded

---

**Note:** This document is for internal development reference. Update as the project evolves.
